---
layout: default
title: On gender identity
date: 2015-04-06 19:00:00 +0800
---

Human gender and sexuality are immensely complex concepts due to our
complexity as a species. Despite this, it's quite simple to handle
gender identity in an everyday setting. You can initially guess
someone's gender, because you'll probably be correct most of the time.
Otherwise, accept any corrections or simply ask them how they wish to
be referred, and respect their identity. If you deliberately misgender
a person because they don't pass your personal threshold of physical
characteristics to be worthy of their gender, you're not just being
rude, but you're also espousing an excessively simplified and
internally inconsistent conceptual understanding of gender.

Perhaps the most pernicious idea which comes from this is that where a
transgender person is not genuinely a member of the gender with which
they identify until they undergo sex reassignment surgery. It's petty
because there are virtually no valid reasons to care about someone's
genitalia outside of a sexual, reproductive, or medical context. The
procedure or lack thereof should make no difference to how a person
will interact with most other people. Some transgender people may not
be able to undergo this surgery due to medical, financial, or other
constraints, while others may not even want to do so at all. This may
be for any reason, but the decision is ultimately a personal one.

This reasoning extends to other elements of gender transitioning, such
as hormone replacement therapy, changes to physical or social
expressions, adherence to any number of gender roles, sexual
orientation or behaviour, and the use of pronouns. Each of these is an
optional personal choice for the individual involved, and any or all of
them may be subject to financial, social, legal, or other limitations.
Using a checklist of these elements to determine whether or not a
person deserves to openly identify as their gender is as absurd as
using their physical characteristics to determine their gender, a
social construct which is purely psychological in nature.

Let's take a look, by example, at why refusing to refer to someone
using the gender with which they identify is indicative of a flawed
understanding of gender. What of a biological female who identifies as
a woman, but expresses many masculine characteristics due to choice,
heredity, or otherwise? What of her inverse, where a man who is born
male is simply very androgynous or even feminine? What of her converse
or her contrapositive, where a transgender person undergoes few or no
elements of transitioning, resulting in a gender identity which remains
different to their outward expressions of gender? What of an intersex,
agender, or genderqueer person? How about a person who identifies with
a gender which may be prevalent in their culture, but does not fall
within the typical gender binary or other framework of yours?

The intersection of biological sex with our set of diverse and
intricate cultures makes any perceived ability to compartmentalise
people into neat little boxes impossible. Given our position as a
sapient, introspective, and in some ways advanced species, a personal
ideal of mine would be to see more humans and their cultures transcend
the existence of the concept of gender altogether, while simultaneously
relegating biological sex to cease its influence beyond its own
inherent purview, that is to say, the sexual and reproductive.

Until then we're mostly stuck with the gender categories that are
prevalent in our local cultures, but nobody should have to do anything
or look a certain way to be qualified to identify with their gender of
choice. You may not have an interest in gender identity, and that's
fine, but if you respect someone, let alone care about them, be sure to
refer to them in alignment with their wishes â€” it's truly that simple.
