---
layout: post
title: Fog
date: 2015-12-13 23:00:00 +0800
tags: attic self
---

A fog has descended upon my mind throughout this year, and it has
become so thick that I can barely remember what life was like before
it. If I were to kill myself tomorrow, it would no longer be because
of my mood. It would be because my cognitive and executive functions
have deteriorated to the point where I can barely do what's necessary
to operate as a human, let alone work, think, or learn. I don't have
the motivation to actually harm myself, but soon I'll literally
become bored out of my mind.

To start with some positive news, I've made some progress since I
started consulting a psychiatrist soon after I [last wrote][triple]
about my state of mind. My problems with falling asleep and staying
awake have mostly subsided by taking mirtazapine. Anxiety and panic
attacks now rarely occur, and my mood has improved slightly, although
the extent to which my treatments have influenced this isn't clear.

[triple]: /2015/06/13/triple-fault.html

Now that the waiting period for the upgrade to my health insurance
has elapsed, I'm about to start a [course] of cognitive behavioural
therapy as a day patient at Perth Clinic. The course will run from
tomorrow for two weeks, full time, and I'll only be leaving every
night to sleep. Both friends and medical professionals alike have
said that therapy should be effective, especially when combined with
appropriate medication.

[course]: http://perthclinic.com.au/services/services-for-patients/treatment-programs/

I feel like the challenges I'm now dealing with mainly revolve around
thinking, planning, attention, and motivation. These symptoms could
simply be part of major depression, or they could form part of one or
more other conditions which may cause or otherwise interact with
depression, but are yet to be diagnosed.

Let's start by talking about executive functioning. I can't remember
a time this year where I've arrived at a meeting or any other
commitment on time, and as such, I've gained a reputation for being
late to everything.

I can't find the energy or motivation to do anything at all unless it
has become urgently necessary. I can't even take a shower or brush my
teeth unless I need to go outside, or I've gone long enough without
doing so that my health would become at risk.

My parents are about to paint the inside of our house, and to be able
to do so, I must vacate my room. This has been one of the best things
to happen to me recently, because if not for it, I would continue to
live in what I'd almost consider a [squalid condition][squalid].

[squalid]: /static/WP_20151211_20_13_48_Pro.webm

Among the clutter on my desk are 18 months' worth of unsorted mail
and other paperwork, which would honestly only take a couple of hours
to organise, but I can't bring myself to actually do so, and it's
incredibly frustrating.

About a month ago, I lost my pair of nail clippers. Some rational
choices that I could've made once I needed to use them included
searching for them, borrowing a pair from my parents, or even buying
a new pair of nail clippers. I consciously knew that any of these
options would've solved my predicament, but instead, I simply let my
nails grow and grow until I stumbled upon them yesterday, while I
was vacating my room.

I feel like I can no longer think. Simple tasks like reading and
writing have become almost insurmountably difficult, and solving
trivial problems like installing software have suffered a similar
fate. Last week was my first week at my new job — a full time job —
and all I managed to achieve was that I wrote one and a half pages of
the introduction to my research paper, which is the easiest section
to write by far.

I've tried several medications, with less than promising results.
Reuptake inhibitors like escitalopram, duloxetine, and venlafaxine
have done nothing for me, with a variety of adverse effects that were
annoying at best. The only clear effect of mirtazapine has been the
one side effect that I've had while taking it, sedation, which is
thankfully desirable.

In response to my complaints about lethargy and cognition, my
psychiatrist has suggested that the options I have going forward may
include bupropion and reboxetine, and I agree with his implication
that we should look into medications with noradrenergic effects.

I've occasionally taken stimulants that are used to treat ADHD and
its related symptoms before, and they've essentially been the only
way that I've been able to get anything done recently. The difference
that they've made for me has been temporary but marked, and without
any exaggeration, I'd describe them as the only way that I've been
able to catch a glimpse of what my mind was like a couple of years
ago. Without dexamfetamine, for example, there's no way that I
would've been able to write the [revision material][revision] for an
exam study session that attracted well over fifty students.

[revision]: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1V0daPBXxOrxb4Ckrfhodf2QO-6Ag067y8am479oIjB0

Even if my access to these medications wasn't limited, I'd rather
actually be prescribed them, for obvious safety reasons, but finding
a way to effectively convey this to a medical professional will
probably be fraught with difficulty. While I'm certainly not saying
that I necessarily have it, some medical professionals don't see ADHD
or its related symptoms as a condition in their own right, some will
never prescribe a stimulant, and many will treat anyone who suggests
that they may be effective with condescension and suspicion.

My next week is certainly going to be interesting, if nothing else.
